\documentclass[man, 11pt, longtable, floatsintext, notab]{apa6}

\usepackage{epsf, epsfig, amssymb, amsmath, xcolor,
  booktabs, colortbl, rotating, setspace, fancyhdr}

\usepackage{endfloat}
\usepackage{float}
\restylefloat{table}
\usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
\usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
\usepackage{textcomp}
\usepackage{gensymb}

\usepackage[style=apa,backend=biber,citestyle=numeric,sorting=none]{biblatex}
\addbibresource{mis_refs.bib}
\DeclareFieldFormat{labelnumberwidth}{\mkbibbrackets{#1}}
\defbibenvironment{bibliography}
  {\list
     {\printtext[labelnumberwidth]{%
      \printfield{labelprefix}%
      \printfield{labelnumber}}}
     {\setlength{\labelwidth}{\labelnumberwidth}%
      \setlength{\leftmargin}{\labelwidth}%
      \setlength{\labelsep}{\biblabelsep}%
      \addtolength{\leftmargin}{\labelsep}%
      \setlength{\itemsep}{\bibitemsep}%
      \setlength{\parsep}{\bibparsep}}%
      \renewcommand*{\makelabel}[1]{\hss##1}}
  {\endlist}
  {\item}

\setcounter{topnumber}{1}
\setcounter{bottomnumber}{1}
\setcounter{totalnumber}{1}

\title{\textbf{Enhanced visuomotor learning and
    generalization in expert surgeons}}

\shorttitle{Expert visuomotor learning}

% \author{Christopher L. Hewitson$^{1,2}$, Matthew J.
%   Crossley$^{1,2,3}$, David M. Kaplan$^{1,2,3}$}
\author{AUTHORS: REDACTED}

% \affiliation{
%   $^1$Macquarie University \\
%   $^2$Perception in Action Research Centre \\
%   $^3$Centre for Elite Performance, Expertise \& Training} 
\affiliation{AFFILIATIONS: REDACTED}

\keywords{Visuomotor adaptation; sensorimotor
  learning; generalization; experts; surgery; minimally
  invasive surgery}

% \authornote{Correspondence: David M. Kaplan, david.kaplan@mq.edu.au}

% \note{
%   \footnotesize
%   \noindent C.L.H. and D.M.K. conceived and designed the
%   experiments. C.L.H. performed the experiments. C.L.H. and
%   M.J.C. analyzed the data. All authors wrote the paper and
%   edited the manuscript. \\

%   \vspace{1mm}
%   \noindent The authors declare no competing interests. \\

%   \vspace{1mm}
%   \noindent This work is supported by an Australian Research
%   Council Centre of Excellence for Cognition and its Disorders
%   Grant [CE11000102] (to D.M.K.) and a Macquarie University
%   Research Seeding Grant [81340492] (to D.M.K.). \\

%   \vspace{5mm}
% }

\abstract{ 
  Although human motor learning has been intensively studied
  for many decades, it remains unknown whether group
  differences are present in expert cohorts that must
  routinely cope with and learn new visuomotor mappings such
  as expert minimally invasive surgeons. We found that expert
  surgeons compensate for a visuomotor perturbation more
  rapidly and to a greater extent than naive controls.
  Modelling indicates that these differences in expert
  behavioural performance reflects greater trial-to-trial
  retention, as opposed to greater trial-to-trial learning
  rate. We also found that surgeons generalize to novel reach
  directions more broadly than controls, a result which was
  subsequently verified by our modelling. In general, our
  findings show that minimally invasive surgeons exhibit
  enhanced visuomotor learning and spatial generalization.
}


\begin{document}
\maketitle

\section{Introduction}
Human motor learning has been intensively studied for many
decades \cite{shadmehr_error_2010},
\cite{krakauer_human_2011}. However, it remains unknown
whether group differences are present in expert cohorts that
must routinely cope with and learn new visuomotor mappings
such as minimally invasive surgeons.

Laparoscopic or minimally invasive surgery (MIS) is rapidly
replacing traditional open surgery for many procedures due
to its major benefits for patients over conventional open
surgery including reductions in infection risks, recovery
times, scarring, and overall hospital stays
\cite{cuschieri_whither_1995}. Despite these advantages, the
task environment in MIS places high demands on surgeons,
increasing the difficulty relative to open surgery for both
initial learning \cite{braga_laparoscopic_2002} and ongoing
performance \cite{cuschieri_whither_1995},
\cite{den_boer_problems_2001}, \cite{joice_ergonomic_1998}.
Since laparoscopic instruments are controlled through small
insertion points in the skin, instrument movements are often
mirror-reversed and counter-intuitive (e.g., leftward hand
motion produces rightward instrument tip motion, and vice
versa). Because surgeons receive visual feedback indirectly
via a laparoscopic camera that is in turn projected to a
video display, rather than through direct observation, they
must also contend with a range of visualization problems
including absent depth information, variable magnification,
and a restricted and frequently distorted (e.g., rotated)
field of view. These factors, which are often subsumed under
the general rubric of ``challenges for hand-eye
coordination'' \cite{wentink_eye-hand_2001}, also impose
heavy computational demands on the brain and likely
contribute to the significant increase in time to achieve
proficiency in MIS compared to open surgery
\cite{rattner_beyond_1999}, \cite{schauer_learning_2003}.

A related and potentially deeper explanation for why MIS is
difficult to learn is that it requires complex sensorimotor
transformations \cite{prinz_action_2013},
\cite{prinz_tool_2013} -- that is, the conversion of sensory
inputs into appropriate motor commands
\cite{pouget_computational_2000}. These transformations are
not trivial, and are known to introduce errors even for
simple goal-directed movements such as pointing to a visible
target \cite{soechting_errors_1989},
\cite{sober_flexible_2005}. Moreover, because this
sensory-to-motor mapping can and often does change during
MIS such as when the laparoscopic camera rotates relative to
the workspace or the fulcrum point of the instrument shifts,
the same motor commands will not always lead to the same
outcome. Consequently, surgeons must be particularly adept
at learning new visuomotor transformations so they can
maintain accurate and consistent motor performance during a
procedure despite these fluctuations. To appreciate the
inherent challenges involved, one can imagine trying to use
a computer mouse if the mapping between mouse and cursor
movement frequently and unpredictably changed.

If MIS introduces challenges for learning appropriate
visuomotor transformations, this suggests that expert
surgeons, who have successfully overcome these challenges,
might perform better than naive controls in a standard
visuomotor adaptation task in which a novel mapping is
imposed between hand motion and the corresponding visual
feedback \cite{cunningham_aiming_1989},
\cite{sternad_motor_2009}. This is either because (1) they
will have spent much more time practicing compensating for
visuomotor perturbations, (2) they are inherently more adept
than most people at compensating for visuomotor
perturbations and this is part of what makes them good
surgeons in the first place, or (3) some combination of both
these factors. The current literature does not address the
plausibility of either of these possibilities. For instance,
it is unknown to what degree the basic neural and cognitive
processes that drive visuomotor adaptation are capable of
enhancements in learning and performance in the first place.
Moreover, it has never been directly shown that expert
surgeons derive their skilled behavior from better
visuomotor adaptation ability. This is precisely the
hypothesis we sought to test in this study.

We predicted that expert minimally invasive surgeons would
compensate more rapidly and more completely for a visuomotor
perturbation and therefore experience smaller errors, and
would exhibit a different pattern of generalization of their
learning than naive controls in a standard visuomotor
adaptation task [16,17]. Our results were generally
consistent with these hypotheses.

\section{Methods}
\subsection{Participants}
10 expert surgeons and 10 naive controls participated in the
study. All were right-hand dominant (LQ > 70) assessed using
the ten-item version of the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory
\cite{oldfield_assessment_1971}, with normal or corrected to
normal vision and no reported motor impairments. All
surgeons (age 47+/-14 years; 9 males, 1 female), were from
[redacted for review] Hospital, and had completed greater
than 100 laparoscopic procedures according to self-report. In
particular, in our sample of 10 MIS surgeons, 7 reported
having completed $\leq$ 1000 MIS procedures and 3 reported $>$ 1000 MIS procedures. Controls ($23\pm3$ years; 4
males, 6 females) were [redacted for review] University
undergraduates with no prior medical or surgical training
and limited video game use ($\leq 3$ hours per week)
\cite{gozli_effect_2014}\cite{lynch_video_2010}\cite{li_playing_2016}.
All participants gave informed consent to participate and
the experimental protocols were approved by the [redacted
for review] Human Research Ethics Committee. Sample size was
consistent with field-standard conventions for visuomotor
adaptation and generalization experiments
\cite{krakauer_learning_2000},\cite{krakauer_independent_1999},\cite{brayanov_motor_2012}
as well as recent studies investigating group differences in
visuomotor learning \cite{leukel_experts_2015}.
\begin{figure*}[h]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=1.0\textwidth]{figures/fig_1.pdf}
  \caption{\scriptsize
    \textbf{Experimental paradigm.} (A) During the baseline
    phase (196 trials), participants performed reaches to 1 of
    11 targets with full visual feedback for 2/3 of the trials
    and no visual feedback for 1/3 of the trials, (B) During the
    adaptation phase (110 trials), participants performed
    reaches to 1 target with visual feedback rotated at the
    endpoint of the movement, (C) During the generalization
    phase (66 trials), participants performed reaches to 1 of 11
    targets (10 untrained target directions) without visual
    feedback, (D) Target array used in the experiment.
  }
  \label{fig_paradigm}
\end{figure*}

\subsection{Experimental Apparatus}
A unimanual KINARM endpoint robot (BKIN Technologies,
Kingston, Ontario, Canada) was utilized in the experiments
for motion tracking and stimulus presentation (Fig
\ref{fig_paradigm}a-c). The KINARM has a single graspable
manipulandum that permits unrestricted 2D arm movement in
the horizontal plane. A projection-mirror system enables
presentation of visual stimuli that appear in this same
plane. Subjects received visual feedback about their hand
position via a cursor (solid white circle, 2.5 mm diameter)
controlled in real-time by moving the manipulandum. Mirror
placement and an opaque apron attached just below the
subject’s chin ensured that visual feedback from the real
hand was not available for the duration of the experiment.

\subsection{Experimental Procedure}
Participants were instructed to perform fast and accurate
point-to-point reaching movements with the dominant (right)
arm using cursor feedback, whenever it was available.
Subjects performed reaches from a start target located at
the center of the workspace to 11 different target locations
9 cm away from the start target and spaced $30\deg$ apart
(Fig 1d) The start target was a solid red circle (5 mm
diameter), and each reach target was a solid green circle (5
mm diameter). The appearance of the reach target served as
the go cue. Participants were positioned so that the
starting target was directly in front of their torso.

The experiment began with a familiarization phase of 33
reach trials (3 per target in pseudorandom order) with
veridical visual feedback provided throughout the reach.
After the familiarization phase, participants rested for 1
minute. The baseline phase consisted of 198 reach trials
across all 11 target directions (18 trials per target). For
2/3 of the reaches (132 trials), veridical cursor feedback
was provided throughout the trial. For the remaining 1/3 (66
trials), visual feedback was withheld. During no-feedback
trials, the cursor disappeared as soon as the hand left the
start target. During the return movement, cursor feedback
was not provided. However, to help guide the participant’s
hand back to the start target a green ring centered over the
start target appeared with a radius equal to the distance
between the hand and start target. Once the participant’s
hand was 1 cm from the start target the ring was removed and
cursor feedback reinstated. After the baseline phase,
participants rested for 1 minute. The adaptation phase
consisted of 110 reaches toward a single target positioned
at $0\deg$ in the frontal plane (straight ahead; see figure
1). As the participant reached toward the target, cursor
feedback was rotated about the start target by $30\deg$ (CW
or CCW; counterbalanced between participants). For the
cursor to move directly toward the target, hand motion would
need to be directed $30\deg$ opposite to the direction of
the cursor rotation. Visual feedback was withheld for the
duration of the outward reach on all trials and was only
provided when the subject’s hand came within 1 cm of the
start target during the return movement
\cite{brayanov_motor_2012}. For 90\% of the trials, visual
feedback was provided at movement offset for 150 ms. These
trials were used for baseline correction of adaptation data.
For the remaining 10\% of the trials, no visual feedback was
provided during the reach or at the endpoint. These were
used to baseline correct generalization data. The
generalization phase consisted of 66 reaches to 1 of 11
target directions (10 untrained directions) presented in
pseudorandom order without visual feedback. No visuomotor
rotation was imposed during the generalization phase.

\subsection{Data Analysis and Models}
Movement kinematics including hand position and velocity
were recorded for all trials using BKIN’s Dexterit-E
experimental control and data acquisition software (BKIN
Technologies). Data was recorded at 200 Hz and logged in
Dexterit-E. Custom scripts for data processing were written
in MATLAB (R2013a). Data analysis was performed in JASP
(0.9.2) and Python (3.7.3). Model fitting was done in Python
(3.7.3) using the SciPy (1.4.1) library. A combined spatial-
and velocity-based criterion was used to determine movement
onset, movement offset, and corresponding reach endpoints
\cite{georgopoulos_relations_1982},
\cite{scott_dissociation_2001}. Movement onset was defined
as the first point in time at which the movement exceeded
5\% of peak velocity after leaving the start target.
Movement offset was similarly defined as the first point in
time at which the movement dropped below 5\% of peak
velocity after a minimum reach of 9 cm from the start target
in any radial direction, and reach endpoints were defined as
the x and y values at movement offset. Trials that failed to
satisfy the minimum reach distance of 9 cm were not included
in the analysis. In total, 210 trials (5.1\%) across all
experimental phases were discarded from the control group
and 162 trials (3.9\%) were discarded in total from the
expert group.

To quantify baseline motor performance, reaction time (RT;
reach target onset – movement onset), total movement time
(MT; movement offset – movement onset), peak velocity (PV),
and hand angle (HA; hand position at movement offset) were
measured on each trial during the baseline phase in which no
visuomotor perturbation was imposed. To investigate
adaptation and generalization performance, we focused on HA.
Group differences in these performance metrics were
initially compared using analysis of variance (ANOVA) and
Welch t-tests ($\alpha < .05$). The Holm–Bonferroni method
was used to correct for multiple comparisons
\cite{holm_simple_1979}. Adaptation and generalization data
for both experts and controls were baseline corrected to
remove any intrinsic biases in individual reach patterns.
For adaptation data, this was done by subtracting each
participant’s mean hand angle measured during the trials of
the baseline phase, where visual-feedback was provided an
movement offset, from their mean hand angle measured during
the adaptation phase. For generalization data, the procedure
was exactly the same except that mean hand angle was
subtracted from no-feedback baseline trials. Learning rates
were initially analyzed using repeated-measures ANOVA and
Welch t-tests. Greenhouse-Geisser corrected values for
ANOVAs are reported in case sphericity was violated. The
Holm–Bonferroni method was used to correct for multiple
comparisons \cite{holm_simple_1979}. Spatial generalization
of learning to new target directions was compared between
experts and controls using repeated-measures ANOVAs.

To more comprehensively understand our adaptation and
generalization results, we also fit our data to a standard
state-space model of motor adaptation
\cite{thoroughman_learning_2000}, \cite{cheng_modeling_2006}
Many dominant theories of motor learning assume that
sensorimotor adaptation involves the establishment and/or
modification of internal representations (so-called internal
models) that map desired motor goals into the time series of
motor commands needed for execution
\cite{wolpert_internal_1998}. It is thought that these
internal models get updated in response to error so that
errors can be reduced from one trial to the next. A simple
state-space model is governed by the following equations:
\begin{equation}
  \delta_{t} = x_{t} - r_{t}
  \label{eq_simple_err}
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}
  x_{t} = \beta x_{t-1} - \alpha \delta_{t-1}
  \label{eq_simple_x}
\end{equation}
Here, $r_t$ is the imposed rotation on trial $t$, $x_t$ is
the state of the system at time $t$, which corresponds to
the current estimate of the rotation, and $\delta$ is the
error experienced on trial $t$. Equation \ref{eq_simple_x}
describes how states are updated from trial to trial. Here,
$\beta \in [0,1]$ is a free parameter that
determines how much of the current state $x_t$ is carried
over from the previous state $x_{t-1}$. That is, the system
has a tendency to decay back to its baseline value (i.e.,
$x_{t=0}$), and $\beta$ determines the rate of this decay.
Because of this, $\beta$ is often referred to as the
\emph{retention rate} or, or alternatively, as the
\emph{forgetting rate} parameter. On the other hand, $\alpha
\in [0,1]$ is a free parameter that determines how much of
the current state changes to compensate for the last
experienced error (i.e., $\alpha$ is the \emph{learning
rate}).

Equations \ref{eq_simple_err} and \ref{eq_simple_x} describe
a model of how motor commands are computed to accomplish a
single motor goal (e.g., reach to the training target that
is directly in front of you). For such a model to generate
many different motor commands to accomplish many different
motor goals, it needs to be augmented with the ability to
maintain separate states for each motor goal (i.e., target
direction). This is accomplished as follows:
\begin{equation}
  \boldsymbol{x}_{t} = \beta \boldsymbol{x}_{t-1} -
  \alpha \delta_{t-1} \boldsymbol{G} \boldsymbol{s}_{t-1}
  \label{eq_context_x_2}
\end{equation}
Here, $\boldsymbol{x_{t}}$ is a $n \times 1$ vector of
states, where $n$ is the number of states and is equal to
the number of distinct motor goals, and $\boldsymbol{s_{t}}$
is a $n \times 1$ indicator vector used to signal which
state is active on trial $t$ (i.e., the motor goal that was
planned for):
\begin{equation}
  \boldsymbol{x}_{t} = \begin{bmatrix} x_1 \\ x_2 \\ \vdots \\ x_n \end{bmatrix},
  \boldsymbol{s}_{t} = \begin{bmatrix} i_1 \\ i_2 \\ \vdots \\ i_n \end{bmatrix},
  i_{j} = \begin{cases}
    1, &
    \text{for reach } j \\ 0, & \text{otherwise}
  \end{cases}
\end{equation}
The error term $\delta_{t-1}$ is computed as:
\begin{equation}
  \delta_{t} = \boldsymbol{x}^{T}_{t} \boldsymbol{s}_{t} - r_{t}
    \label{eq_context_err}
\end{equation}
where $\boldsymbol{x}^{T}_{t}$ indicates the transpose of
$\boldsymbol{x}_{t}$. Finally, $\boldsymbol{G}$ is a
generalization function that specifies how adaptation that
occurs in one state influences adaptation in the other
states. Since all reaches executed in our experiments are
the same length, and differ only by their angular starting
position, we will express $\boldsymbol{G}$ as a function of
the angular distance between the current target direction,
$\theta_{0}$, and every other target direction $\theta_{i}$.
Following a the literature \cite{brayanov_motor_2012}],
\cite{poggio_generalization_2004}, we assume that the
generalization of adaptation falls of as a Gaussian with
distance from the goal target, $\theta_{0}$:
\begin{equation}
  \boldsymbol{G} = e^{\frac{-(\theta_{0} - \boldsymbol{\theta})^2}{2 \sigma}}
\end{equation}
where
\begin{equation}
\boldsymbol{\theta} = \begin{bmatrix} \theta_1 \\ \theta_2 \\ \vdots \\ \theta_n \end{bmatrix}
\end{equation}

In many cases, simple state-space models such as those
described above under-predict the rate of adaptation
observed immediately following the introduction of a
perturbation. In response to this, visuomotor adaptation is
commonly modelled as reflecting the combined contributions
from two different learning processes, one fast and one slow
\cite{smith_interacting_2006},\cite{mcdougle_taking_2016},
as follows:
\begin{equation}
  \boldsymbol{x}_{f, t} = \beta_{f} \boldsymbol{x}_{f,
    t-1} - \alpha_{f} \delta_{t-1} \boldsymbol{G} \boldsymbol{s}_{t-1}
  \label{eq_dual_rate_dual_1}
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}
    \boldsymbol{x}_{s, t} = \beta_{s} \boldsymbol{x}_{s,
      t-1} - \alpha_{s} \delta_{t-1} \boldsymbol{G} \boldsymbol{s}_{t-1}
    \label{eq_dual_rate_dual_2}
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}
  \boldsymbol{x}_{t} = \boldsymbol{x}_{f, t} + \boldsymbol{x}_{s, t}
  \label{eq_dual_rate_dual_3}
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}
  \alpha_{f} > \alpha_{s}, \beta_{f} < \beta_{s}
  \label{eq_dual_rate_dual_4}
\end{equation}
Here, all terms are as they were for the simple one-state
model, with the subscript $f$ and $s$ denoting the fast and
slow system, respectively. Equations
\ref{eq_dual_rate_dual_3} and \ref{eq_dual_rate_dual_4}
express the constraints on the parameter values such that
learning in the fast system must be faster than learning in
the slow system, and that retention in the fast system must
be smaller than retention in the slow system. Put another
way, this ensures that the fast system is fast and labile,
while the slow system is slow and stable.

Some researchers have proposed that the slow system
corresponds to a truly implicit motor process, and the fast
system corresponds to a cognitive process such as an
explicit aiming strategy \cite{mcdougle_taking_2016}.
Further, these two systems are purported to have different
generalization functions
\cite{heuer_generalization_2011},\cite{mcdougle_implications_2017}.
Further, these two systems are purported to have difference
generalization functions. In line with the data suggesting
this, we propose that $\boldsymbol{G}_{s}$ is defined as a
Gaussian as previously described, but that
$\boldsymbol{G}_{f}$ is defined as a uniform shift:
\begin{equation}
  f(\theta) = C
\end{equation}
where $C$ is a scalar free parameter.

Our experiment includes three phases (i.e., baseline,
training, and generalization), and the context of each of
these phases may appear quite different to participants. For
example, during baseline, reaches are made and feedback is
given to all targets. During training, reaches are only made
to the training target. During generalization, reaches are
again made to all targets, but feedback is withheld. Because
of these context differences, it is possible that only a
portion of the adaptation acquired during the training phase
will transfer to the generalization phase (e.g., as is the
case in studies of inter-limb transfer of visuomotor
adaptation, where the context shift corresponds to switching
hands). To allow for this possibility we assume (where the
transfer between training and generalization occurs on trial
$t=306$):
\begin{equation}
  \boldsymbol{x}_{f, t=306} = \gamma_{f} \boldsymbol{x}_{f, t=306} 
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}
  \boldsymbol{x}_{s, t=306} = \gamma_{s} \boldsymbol{x}_{s, t=306} 
\end{equation}
Where $\gamma_{f} \in [0,1]$ and $\gamma_{s} \in [0,1]$ are
scalar free parameters. 

We fit this state-space model to the trial-by-trial endpoint
hand angles observed in the reported experiments, and used
the parameter estimates from the best-fitting model as
dependent measures. The model is fully specified by
equations \ref{eq_dual_rate_dual_1},
\ref{eq_dual_rate_dual_2}, \ref{eq_dual_rate_dual_3}, and
\ref{eq_dual_rate_dual_4}. The behaviour of the model is
fully characterised by eight parameters: two learning rates
($\alpha_s \in [0, 1]$ and $\alpha_f \in [0,1]$); two
retention rates ($\beta_s \in [0,1]$ and $\beta_f \in
[0,1]$), two generalization functions ($g_s \in [0, 150]$
and $g_f \in [0, 1]$), and the proportion of learning in
each system that transfers from training to generalization
($\gamma_s \in [0,1]$ and $\gamma_f \in [0,1]$). We obtained
best-fitting parameter estimates by minimising the sum of
squared error difference between the observed endpoint hand
angles and the model predictions:
\begin{equation}
  E = \sum_{t=1}^{N_{trials}} \left[ \boldsymbol{x}_{pred, t} - \boldsymbol{x}_{obs, t} \right]^2
  \label{eq_sse}
\end{equation}
To find the parameter values that achieved this minimum, we
used the differential evolution optimisation method
implemented in \textit{SciPy}. To construct 95\% confidence
intervals of the resulting parameter estimates, we created a
bootstrapped estimate of the sampling distributions of each
parameter. In particular, for each experiment and condition
containing $N$ participants, we sampled $N$ participants
\textit{with replacement}, computed the average endpoint
hand angle per trial collapsing over subjects (denoted by
$\boldsymbol{x^{*}}$), and found the model parameters that
minimised the sum of squared error between the model
predictions and the bootstrap sample average:
\begin{equation}
    E^* = \sum_{t=1}^{N_{trials}} \left[ \boldsymbol{x}_{pred, t} - \boldsymbol{x^*}_{obs, t} \right]^2
  \label{eq_sse_boot}
\end{equation}
We then repeated this procedure 10,000 times. 95\%
confidence intervals were constructed for each parameter
estimate by taking the 2.5 and 97.5 percentile values from
the bootstrap estimated sampling distribution.

\begin{figure*}[t]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=1.0\textwidth]{figures/fig_2.pdf}
  \caption{\scriptsize
   \textbf{A:} Mean handle angles for controls.
   \textbf{B:} Generalization for controls. Colored dots
   correspond to different targets. The solid line is the total
   output of the best-fitting state-space model, the
   thick-dashed line is the output of the fast system, and the
   thin-dashed line is the output of the slow sytem.
   \textbf{C:} Mean hand angle for surgeons.
   \textbf{D:} Generalization for surgeons. Blue, orange,
   grey-solid and grey-dashed lines represent behavioural data,
   model fit, $g_s$ and $g_s$ respectively.
   }
   \label{fig_results}
\end{figure*}
\section{Results}
Figure \ref{fig_results}A and \ref{fig_results}C show the
mean hand angle across all participants per group for each
trial of the experiment. Figure \ref{fig_results}B and
\ref{fig_results}D show the generalization pattern for each
group.

\subsection{Baseline motor performance}
First, we assessed group differences in baseline motor
performance. For all movement parameters (RT, MT, PV, HA),
we performed ANOVAs for the within-subject factors of TARGET
(11 target directions) and CONDITION (feedback vs
no-feedback), and the between-subject factor GROUP (experts
vs controls). While there was a significant effect of GROUP,
no GROUP $\times$ TARGET, or GROUP $\times$ TARGET $\times$
CONDITION interactions were observed indicating no
differences across target directions or feedback conditions
during the baseline phase (\ref{table_1}).
\begin{table*}[t]
  \centering
  \footnotesize
  \begin{tabular}{ l|l|l|l } 
    & GROUP & GROUP $\times$ TARGET & GROUP $\times$ TARGET $\times$ CONDITION \\
    \hline
    RT & $F_{1,1}=331.1,  p_{h} <.001, \omega^2 = 0.077$ & $F_{1,1}0=1.218, p=.274$ & $F_{1,1}0=1.04, p_{h}>.99$\\ 
    MT & $F_{1,1} = 564, p_{h} <.001, \omega^2 = 0.124$ & $F_{1,1}0=1.137, p=.331$ & $F_{1,1}0=1.14, p_{h} >.99$\\  
    PV & $F_{1,1} = 9.49, p_{h} =.002, \omega^2 = 0.002$ & $F_{1,1}0=0.91, p=.523$ & $F_{1,1}0=.384, p_{h} >.99$\\ 
    HA & $F_{1,1}=394.5, p_{h} <.001, \omega^2 = 0.091$ & $F_{1,1}0=0.752, p=.675$ & $F_{1,1}0=0.831, p_{h} >.99$\\
  \end{tabular}
  \caption{Baseline phase performance statistics. $p_{h}$ indicates 
  the Holm-Bonferroni corrected p-value.}
  \label{table_1}
\end{table*}

Hand angles during baseline were normally distributed
(Shapiro-Wilk test; Controls baseline: $p=.229$; Experts
baseline: $p=.383$; Controls adaptation: $p=.133$; Experts
adaptation: $p=.208$). Experts were on average more
accurate. Error (rotation - hand angle) was smaller for
experts ($mean \pm SE = 1.1 \pm 0.053\degree$) than for
controls ($4.0\pm0.127\degree$) ($p<.001, d = 0.66$).
Experts were also more precise (exhibited lower variance) in
their movement endpoints compared to controls (Levene's test
for equality of variances $F(1, 3958) = 1041.94, p < .001$).
RT was shorter on average ($350 \pm 180ms$) for experts than
for controls ($480 \pm 200ms$) ($p<.001, d = 0.61$), and MT
was shorter on average ($760 \pm 135ms$) for experts than
for controls ($900 \pm 180ms$)($p<.001, d= 0.795$). However,
peak velocity was greater for controls ($PV = 15.2\pm7.2
cm/s$) than experts ($14.4\pm6.5 cm/s$) ($p<.001, d =-
0.105$).

\subsection{Visuomotor adaptation}
We then tested whether the rate and extent of visuomotor
learning during the adaptation phase differed between
experts and controls. We performed a repeated measures ANOVA
on HA for the within-subject factor of BIN (10 trials per
bin), the interaction between BIN $\times$ GROUP, and the
between-subject factor of GROUP across 11 bins. There was a
significant within-subject effect of BIN ($F_{1,10} = 59.6,
p_h <.001, \omega^22 = 0.213$), which indicates that hand
angles in both groups changed over time in response to the
rotation. There was also a significant interaction between
BIN $\times$ GROUP ($F_{1,10} = 14.4, p_h <.001, \omega^2 =
0.058$), reflecting that experts compensated for the
rotation more quickly than controls. The effect size for
both comparisons was small. A significant between-subject
effect of GROUP ($F_{1,1} = 269, p_h <.001, \omega^2 =
0.573$), indicating an overall difference in hand angle
between groups. This effect size was more appreciable.

Group differences were present in the first two bins
(Experts adapted 73.7\% ($21.5 \pm 6.3 \deg$) compared to
62.9\% ($17.1 \pm 5.5 \deg$) for controls ($p<.001$;
baseline adjusted)), but not significant in the last two
bins (Experts adapted 98.7\% ($29.6 \pm 2.0\deg$) compared
to 94.9\% ($28.5 \pm 4.3\deg$) for controls ($p<.923$;
baseline adjusted)), indicating that experts differed from
controls initially, but that performance between the groups
ultimately reached similar asymptotic levels.

\subsection{Generalization}
Finally, we investigated whether spatial generalization of
learning differed between the groups (Figure 3B and 3D show
the generalization pattern for each group). As with the
adaptation results, we first performed a repeated measures
ANOVA. The within-subject factor of TARGET and TARGET x
GROUP interaction, as well as the between-subject factor of
GROUP, were compared across the 11 targets (6 trials per
target). There was a significant within-subject effect of
TARGET ($F_{1,9.67} = 2518.2, p_h <.001, \omega^2 = 0.95$
Greenhouse-Geisser corrected) indicating that adaptation
generalized to different extents across target direction.
There was also a significant TARGET x GROUP interaction
($F_{1,9.67} = 130.8, p_h <.001, \omega^2 = 0.496$;
Greenhouse-Geisser corrected), indicating that experts
generalized more broadly than controls. The between-subject
effect of GROUP was also significant ($F_{1,1} = 12276, p_h
<.001, \omega^2 = 0.990$; Greenhouse-Geisser corrected),
indicating that experts’ pattern of generalization across
targets was different from controls.

\begin{figure*}[h]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=1.0\textwidth]{figures/fig_3.pdf}
  \caption{\scriptsize
    Bootstrap estimated sampling distributions for every
    parameter in the fitted models. Control data is blue, Expert
    data is orange.
  }
  \label{fig_params}
\end{figure*}
\subsection{State-Space Modelling}
We also performed state-space modelling (see methods). The
predicted performance from the best fitting model is shown
in Figure 3. Figure \ref{fig_params} shows the best-fitting
value, along with the bootstrap estimated sampling
distributions for each model parameter.

For all statistical results reported below, we used a
bootstrap t-test. The difference in best fitting parameter
values between experts and controls was significant for both
retention parameters [$\beta_s: p<.05; \beta_f: p<.01$],
with experts displaying higher retention in the fast system
and lower retention in the slow system than controls. This
indicates that experts came to rely on their fast system
relatively more than controls, while controls came to rely
on their slow system relatively more than experts. The slow
system generalization width parameter was also significantly
different between groups [$g_s: p<.01$], with experts
generalizing more broadly than controls. Finally, the slow
system context transfer parameter was also significantly
different between experts and controls [$\gamma_s: p <
.01$], reflecting that -- upon transfer to the
generalization phase -- experts retained essentially all of
their adaptation from training, whereas controls lost a
significant portion. Visual inspection of Figure
\ref{fig_results} shows that both experts and controls
display a positive uniform shift in their generalization,
and this is reflected in our best-fitting $g_f$ values for
these two groups, which are both significantly different
from zero (see Figure \ref{fig_params}). However, the
difference in this shift -- which appears greater for
experts than for controls -- was not statistically
significant [$g_f: p=.98$]. No other between-group
difference in parameters was significant [$\alpha_s: p=.09$;
$\alpha_f: p=.80$; $g_f: p=.98$; $\gamma_f: p=.16$].

One of most interesting aspects of our data is that control
performance drops precipitously from the end of adaptation
to the generalization phase, and expert performance does not
(as reflected in the statistical difference in best-fitting
context transfer parameters $\gamma_s$). Inspection of
Figure \ref{fig_params} indicates that this difference must
be driven though the slow system, and shows that differences
in $\gamma_f$ cannot capture this results.

\section{Discussion}
In the current study, we hypothesized that expert minimally
invasive surgeons would exhibit enhanced visuomotor learning
compared to controls either because they draw on an
extensive body of experience coping with such visuomotor
perturbations, are inherently more adept at compensating for
visuomotor perturbations, or both. During minimally invasive
procedures an assistant typically directs the camera through
one of the ports on the opposite side of the patient to the
surgeon, and must often adjust the camera position and
orientation to improve the view of the operative field. This
means that the visual feedback the surgeon uses is often
rotated and/or translated. Importantly, every rotation and
translation of the camera is a visuomotor perturbation in
the sense that the mapping between surgical movements and
visual feedback is altered (i.e., the same motor commands
will not lead to the same visual outcome). These
considerations were the basis for our predictions about
enhanced visuomotor performance among expert surgeons.

Surprisingly little attention has been given to surgeons as
an informative expert cohort in visuomotor learning studies.
More generally, there has been limited exploration of
group-level differences in visuomotor adaptation
\cite{leukel_experts_2015},\cite{kast_motor_2016}. In the
most relevant study to date, Leukel and colleagues
\cite{leukel_experts_2015} explored visuomotor learning in
expert handball players. Similar to our study, they reported
lower task-relevant movement variability (higher
consistency) and greater accuracy in their expert group
prior to learning, both widely considered to be hallmarks of
expert performance
\cite{willingham_neuropsychological_1998}. Yet
interestingly, they observed no learning rate differences in
one experiment and a slower rate of adaptation in experts
compared to novices in another experiment. One plausible
explanation for this discrepancy is that handball players do
not have to contend with or achieve mastery over changes in
visuomotor mappings as do expert surgeons with extensive
training and experience performing MIS. However, other
differences between their study and ours make precise
comparisons difficult.

\subsection{State-space model is more than curve-fitting}
Our analysis in this paper leans heavily on a two-state
state-space model that was simultaneously fit to all phases
of our experimental data. Specifically, the fitting routine
was constrained to simultaneously find a single set of
parameters that best fit the pattern of reach endpoints
observed during baseline, adaptation, and generalization. As
such, our model departs from more traditional curve-fitting
approaches including fitting exponential or power functions
to adaptation data and Gaussian functions to generalization
data. It also differs from state-space modelling approaches
that fit only a subset of data at a time (e.g., using one
set of parameters to fit adaptation and another to fit
generalization).

\subsection{Group differences during adaptation are driven
  by retention rate, not learning rate}
In a standard visuomotor adaptation task, we found that
expert minimally invasive surgeons compensate for visuomotor
perturbations more rapidly than naive controls, but to an
equal extent. To shed light on possible drivers of this
effect, we developed a computational model that assumed that
visuomotor adaptation is driven through the combination of
two learning systems or processes -- one that is fast and
labile, and another that is slow and stable
\cite{smith_interacting_2006}. This model explicates several
factors that could make experts compensate more successfully
than controls, the most intuitive of which is that experts
adapt more in response to experienced errors (i.e., experts
might have a larger learning rate then controls). Our
modelling results reject this hypothesis, although there was
a trend in this direction (e.g., a one-tailed test for
$\alpha_s$ being larger for experts than for controls was
significant at p<.05). This suggests that there may in fact
be real learning differences between groups, but that our
study may have been under-powered.

Another possibility is that experts might exhibit more stable
adaptation than controls (i.e., they might have a larger
retention rate than controls). Our modelling results
strongly suggest that this is the case, but the exact
mechanism must be considered carefully. In particular,
relative to controls, experts had more stable adaptation in
the fast system, but less stable adaptation in the slow
system. The net effect of this arrangement is that experts
came to rely on their fast system more than controls, and
controls came to rely on their slow more than experts.

This pattern seems especially relevant in light of
theoretical considerations that associate the fast system
with explicit strategies, whereas the slow system is
associated with implicit motor adaptation. By this view,
during adaptation, experts come to rely on explicit
strategies proportionally more than controls, while controls
come to rely on implicit motor adaptation more than experts.
Thus, the difference in compensation during adaptation might
indicate that experts simply aim better than controls.

\subsection{Difference in generalization width}
We found that (1) both groups exhibited generalization
functions that were approximately Gaussian with peaks at the
trained target direction, (2) experts generalized more
broadly than controls, and (3) both groups displayed a
positive uniform shift of the entire Gaussian shape
significantly greater than zero. Our modelling shows that
this uniform shift in hand angles across target directions
can be naturally accounted for by assuming that the fast
system corresponds to explicit aiming, and that it
generalizes uniformly, as suggested by previous literature
[34,35].

If the deployment of explicit strategies is the primary
driver of group differences in our generalization results
(e.g., as implied by the retention rate differences
discussed above), then we would expect a larger positive
shift in the generalization curve of experts but not an
increase in the width of the Gaussian, the latter of which
is presumably driven by implicit motor adaptation. However,
our results indicate the opposite of this prediction. The
uniform shift in the generalization function caused by the
fast system ($g_f$) did not significantly differ between
groups. Thus, experts and controls appear to have
generalized the use of strategies similarly. Furthermore,
the width of the Gaussian generalisation curve was
significantly different between groups, as seen for example
in best-fitting $g_s$ values, and this likely reveals a true
difference in implicit motor learning for experts as
compared to controls. It remains to be determined whether
broader spatial generalization is a benefit or cost to
expert MIS surgeons. On one hand, it could help surgeons
cope with visuomotor perturbations that remain relatively
stationary during a procedure such as when camera position
is held constant relative to the workspace. On the other
hand, over-generalisation may lead to interference when
perturbations are highly variable such as when the camera
position needs to be adjusted repeatedly to obtain a
suitable view of the workspace.

\subsection{Transfer cost in controls, but not experts}
We observed a large difference between groups in the best
fitting context transfer parameter, $\gamma_s$. This
difference is reflected in the pronounced drop-off from
training to generalization for controls, but not in the
surgeons. Note that Figure \ref{fig_results} shows that the
drop in hand angle from training to generalization seen in
the controls very likely cannot be driven by the fast system
context transfer parameter, $\gamma_f$, because no
between-group difference in $\gamma_f$ ever occurred in 10,000
bootstrap samples. Thus, the cost of transferring from
training to generalization appears to be a property of the
slow system (i.e., implicit motor learning).

Transfer costs like the one displayed by our control group
are common. A sharp drop in error compensation (from $\sim20\%$ to
$\sim40\%$)  occurring between the
end of adaptation and the start of a no-feedback
(washout/de-adaptation) phase seems to be present in previous studies using similar designs, although this effect was not explicitly reported
\cite{sternad_motor_2009},
\cite{mazzoni_implicit_2006},
\cite{sadnicka_normal_2014}, \cite{haar_dissociating_2015},
\cite{jalali_neural_2018},
\cite{nakagawa-silva_framework_2018}. From this
perspective, it is remarkable that our expert group did not
display any transfer cost. Thus, this appears to be another
difference in the implicit visuomotor adaptation system of
experts.

\subsection{Explanations based on general motor performance do not account for our results}
We found that during baseline reaches, experts were more
precise, exhibiting lower variance in their movement
endpoints compared to controls. However, these general
characteristics of motor performance cannot account for the
results observed during adaptation and generalization.
First, all individual adaptation data for both experts and
controls were baseline corrected so that any possible
effects of greater accuracy among surgeons (or higher error
among controls) were factored out in our results. Second,
changes in variance should not appreciably change the
reported means in our data since our baseline and adaptation
endpoint data are normally distributed according to a
Shapiro-Wilk test for normality (see Results). Finally,
recent work exploring the link between intrinsic motor
variability and motor learning ability
\cite{anguera_failure_2011} generates predictions that run
counter to what we observed. Wu et al.
\cite{wu_temporal_2014} report that participants exhibiting
higher levels of baseline motor variability tended to
express faster adaptation rates compared to individuals with
lower motor variability. Since surgeons show lower intrinsic
motor variability (defined in our paradigm as lower variance
in hand angle during the baseline phase) than controls, this
would predict slower not faster, motor learning. Again, this
is not what we observed.

Group differences in reaction time (RT) or total movement
time (MT) also cannot explain our visuomotor learning
results. First, consider RT. Although the relationship
between changes in RT and visuomotor adaptation has received
relatively little attention, there is some evidence for a
correlation \cite{anguera_contributions_2010}. Specifically,
participants who exhibited the largest RT increases during
early stages of visuomotor adaptation to a visuomotor
perturbation showed the fastest learning rates, whereas
participants who incurred little or no RT cost exhibited
slower learning rates. This is not what we observed. In our
study, control participants showed longer RTs and slower
learning rates on average during the adaptation phase,
whereas expert surgeons showed shorter RTs and faster
learning rates on average. Fernandez-Ruiz et al. (2011)
\cite{fernandez-ruiz_relation_2011} attributed the longer
RTs to participants’ deployment of a cognitive strategy
(i.e., mental rotation), which is known to exhibit a time
cost
\cite{mackenzie_movement_1995},\cite{green_action_2003}.
Based on this interpretation, our findings would suggest
that it is controls rather than experts who more extensively
exploit explicit strategies. However, this is not what is
indicated by our generalization results.

Next, consider MT. Based on Fitts’ law
\cite{bavelier_enhancing_2019}, which characterizes an
inverse relationship or “tradeoff” between movement time and
spatial accuracy, the faster overall movements of experts
should be associated with lower accuracy and the slower
overall movements of controls should be associated with
higher accuracy. However, this is not what we observed.
Experts exhibited higher spatial accuracy (lower error)
during the baseline phase than controls. No significant
interactions between MT and HA or RT and HA were found
during baseline or adaptation phases.

\subsection{Explanations based on attention do not account 
for our results}
Certain expert cohorts have been shown to have enhanced
attentional capacities [48,49], and this has even been
directly linked to improvements in visuomotor adaptation
\cite{debats_explicit_2018}. It is therefore possible that
the observed differences in performance in our study reflect
attentional differences between surgeons and controls. Yet
specific features of our paradigm make this explanation
unlikely. Even if the surgeons we tested have superior
attentional capacities compared to controls, our task is not
very attentionally demanding – only a single reach target is
presented per trial without the appearance of any
distractors. Although attention has been shown to affect
generalization of visuomotor learning
\cite{bedard_attention_2013},\cite{wang_impaired_2017},
these studies use concurrent attention-demanding secondary
tasks during the adaptation period which differs
substantially from the paradigm we employed.

\subsection{Explanations based on age do not account 
    for our results}
Finally, age differences between the groups (median age of
controls = 23; median age of surgeons = 45) do not account
for the observed results. Studies investigating the effect
of age on visuomotor adaptation consistently report a
negative correlation between the ability to compensate for a
visuomotor rotation and age in healthy adult populations
\cite{anguera_failure_2011},
\cite{seidler_differential_2006},
\cite{voelcker-rehage_motor-skill_2008},
\cite{king_neural_2013}, \cite{buch_visuomotor_2003}, yet
our results show the inverse result. That is, the older
experts compensated for the perturbation better than younger
controls.

\subsection{Limitations}
The current study has several important limitations. First,
although our findings indicate that the visuomotor learning
abilities of expert surgeons differs from naive controls,
our study does not address whether these differences are
innate or reflect extensive experience training for and
performing minimally invasive surgeries under visuomotor
perturbations (or some combination of both). Appropriately
designed longitudinal studies or different cross-sectional
studies involving one or more intermediate groups between
surgical experts and naive controls will be required to
tackle this critical issue.

Second, this study does not fully tease apart the relative
contribution of implicit learning versus explicit strategy
use \cite{smith_interacting_2006},
\cite{mcdougle_taking_2016}, \cite{mazzoni_implicit_2006},
\cite{taylor_explicit_2014}. Although some of our results
suggest that experts and controls are similar with respect
to their use of cognitive strategies such as explicit
changes in aiming, it remains possible that some
expert-level differences may be revealed through additional
experiments. Experiments specifically designed to decompose
the contributions of these different learning processes such
as those involving explicit aiming
\cite{taylor_explicit_2014}, \cite{bond_flexible_2015},
constrained movement preparation time
\cite{haith_influence_2015}, \cite{leow_estimating_2017},
and/or the inclusion of a discrete washout (de-adaptation)
phase to probe for after-effects
\cite{smith_interacting_2006} will be required to make
progress on this issue \cite{mcdougle_taking_2016},
\cite{mazzoni_implicit_2006}, \cite{taylor_explicit_2014}.
We hope that the current findings provide the impetus for
this important future work.

\subsection{Conclusions}
Despite its major benefits for patients compared to open
surgery, it is now widely recognized that minimally invasive
surgery is inherently challenging to learn and can even be
prohibitively difficult for some surgical residents such
that they never reach proficiency
\cite{green_action_2003}, \cite{buckley_impact_2014}.
Pinpointing the underlying sources of these difficulties
remains an unanswered challenge. The main findings reported
here of expert-level differences in visuomotor adaptation
suggest that differences in visuomotor learning capacities,
either innate or acquired, might be an important source of
difficulty for learning to perform minimally invasive
surgery. Because our study demonstrates that a standard
visuomotor learning paradigm gives rise to reliable task
performance differences between expert minimally invasive
surgeons and non-experts, this opens the door for the
exploration of other common paradigms such as gain
adaptation \cite{krakauer_learning_2000}, which may in turn
shed valuable light on motor learning and expert performance
in increasingly dominant approaches in surgical medicine
such as robotic surgery.

\printbibliography
\end{document}
